Blog post LUKS performance impact (#556)
SovereignCloudStack/website: _i18n/en/_posts/blog/2023-02-24-impact-of-disk-encryption.md

---
layout: post
title: "Performance impact of disk encryption using LUKS"
author:
  - "Paul-Philipp Kuschy"
avatar:
  - "ppkuschy.jpg"
about:
  - "ppkuschy"
image: "blog/luks-performance-impact.png"
---

## Preface

> During some weekly meetings of SCS SIG Container and also 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
During some weekly meetings of SCS Team Container and also 
```

Author: LGTM

> SCS SIG Infrastructure the question emerged whether or not generally 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
SCS Team IaaS the question emerged whether or not generally 
```

Author: LGTM

Reviewer: You need to actively accept the suggestions (either via GitHub UI or with your prefered IDE).

However bandwidth and IOPS losses are quite big and can 
lead - depending on the I/O pattern - to about **79 %** performance penalty. 
Worst performance losses were seen with sequential write (**up to 79 %**) 
followed by sequential read (**up to 53 %**). 
Random I/O losses were worst with random writes (**up to 43 %**) 
followed by random read (**up to 26 %**). In some single benchmarks 
performance was better than without encryption, up to **5 times faster** 
across a RAID-0 at 4 KiB sequential writes. 
This possibly can be attributed to optimized I/O queueing.

<p class="lead">
<strong>Recommendation:</strong> You can usually safely turn on disk encryption with HDDs, 
as it likely won't cause many problems regarding CPU load even within 
<abbr title="Hyper converged infrastructure">HCI</abbr>. 
However the performance penalty in throughput and IOPS can be quite tremendous 
compared to non-encrypted operation.
</p>

### Impact on all flash

On NVME all flash systems the load impact can be **gigantic**.
A RAID 0 across just three LUKS encrypted NVME SSDs was enough 
to fully saturate the CPU on test system B.

> It shows in the fio data when adding up usr_cpu and sys_cpu values.  

Reviewer 2: I would recommend that you intro fio alongside with how you invoke fio / configuration file. Further below you dive into some of those considerations but I would suggest to provide the commandline / config being used.

Author: I actually removed that part because fio is a tool that many UNIX administrators are pretty familiar with and I didn't want to poorly repeat the manual page for fio (especially since the blog post already is quite long). I did mention the types of benchmarks performed and the IO engine used, so with that information it would be pretty easy for people to do their own benchmarks. I'd suggest waiting for reader feedback. If there is demand for the script, I can provide an update with the script and the raw benchmark data it generated for people to play with.
And since I want to test crypto accelerators that integrate with dmcrypt (once I get the proper hardware to do so), I'd say there is room for a new blog post covering that topic where I could also place more detail on the tooling if needed.

I encountered a severe showstopper for using that technology in servers, 
especially in cloud environments:

After powering down the system or manually locking the drive and rebooting, 
the system firmware stopped during POST to ask for the passphrase for each drive.

On the Supermicro server test system I found no way to disable that in BIOS/UEFI, 
which makes that technology not reboot-safe and thus unusable in server environments. 
**Even worse** was that even when trying to type in the passphrase, 
it wasn't accepted. So somehow the way `sedutil` stores the passphrase differs 
from what the firmware does?

<p class="lead">
<strong>Recommendation:</strong> The tooling needs to be polished and documentation 
significantly improved. Documentation on the tools is very confusing for the 
general system administrator and can easily lead to operator errors. <br />
Also due to the current BIOS/UEFI issues the technology cannot be recommended as of yet.
</p>

<p class="lead">
If vendors would provide a way to disable asking for the passphrase of certain drives 
it would be possible to use SEDs in a DC environment without the need of 
manual operator intervention when rebooting.

> </p>

Reviewer 2: I think, this paragraph actually leads to a certain de-focus of the blogpost. I'd suggest to **briefly** state why self-encrypted drives are not being taken into consideration for this performance assesment but would not dive into details. Especially since it lacks solid background imho.

Author: I'd actually leave that in as-is because I did actually test SEDs and the tools that exist for them. Since the impact of using dm-crypt/LUKS (as seen in the benchmarks) is (depending on the workload) enormous SEDs could be an alternative. But that alternative needs a bit more development at least when it comes to UEFI of servers. The showstopper issue I found could easily be fixed by server vendors and then SEDs could become a real alternative at least in terms of performance as they have no impact at all. And even though the technology is not practically usable as of now, I think it's a good idea to mention the state of that technology... maybe that post will be read by some server vendors and they'll have offerings/feedback or at least start to put that into their UEFI - which might be useful for CSPs. ;)
